---
layout: post
title: Integrating mmvec and Random Forest for in-depth Analysis of the Cervicovaginal Microenvironment
date: 2017-12-17 00:00:00 +0300
description: Research and analysis of methods used in primary research investigating the cervicovaginal microenvironment with the goal of enhancing understanding of both machine learning methods and multi-omics approach.
img: software.jpg # Add image post (optional)
tags: [Academic, Literature Review, Machine Learning, Microbiome, Multi-omics] # add tag
---

### **Background**

This study integrates microbiome, metabolome, and immunoproteome data to enhance understanding of immune-related diseases, with significant implications for women's health and cervical cancer research. Understanding the human microbiome, specifically the vaginal microbiome, is essential to understand its mucosal homeostasis. The distinctive features of a healthy vaginal microbiome, marked by *Lactobacillus* dominance (LD) and the production of lactic acid and antimicrobial agents, protect against pathogens such as HPV. Contrastingly, a dysbiotic vaginal microenvironment, characterized by the depletion of *Lactobacillus* and the prevalence of anaerobes, results in an elevated pH—a common occurrence in women with HPV and invasive cervical carcinoma (ICC) (1). This comprehensive exploration of the vaginal microbiome underscores not only the significance of understanding microbial dynamics but also highlights the potential for targeted interventions in women's health.

Metabolome studies provide nuanced insights into the metabolic outputs of distinct bacterial groups, establishing associations that illuminate their functional roles within the microbial community. These metabolites act as signals in the dynamic communication between host and microbiome, as metabolite profiles can reveal how microbial products influence the expression of immune genes, activation of specific cell types, and the production of inflammatory mediators. Pairing microbiome and metabolome studies can reveal how specific microbial products modulate immune cell activity, inflammation, and tissue activity. Combining information on microbial composition, metabolic outputs, and immune responses enables researchers to discern associations between bacterial groups and specific immune signatures and can lead to the development of models that predict the risk or progression of immune-related diseases. Metabolic studies can also be used to determine biomarkers for disease by using distinct metabolic signatures that can distinguish between healthy and diseased states, in this case healthy and dysbiotic vaginal states. This integrative approach provides a foundation for developing predictive frameworks and uncovering biomarkers that hold diagnostic relevance in health and disease contexts.

Advancements in HPV and cervical cancer research are pivotal for shaping preventative and therapeutic approaches, offering the potential to alleviate the burden of cervical cancer among women, particularly in middle to low-income countries. The high disease burden these populations face is attributed to various factors including limited access to HPV vaccinations, insufficient cervical cancer screening and detection programs, and inadequate treatment options. By using the multi-omics approach in this study, the authors could identify efficient strategies to develop potential therapeutics specifically tailored to at-risk populations and addressing critical healthcare gaps.

### **Methods**

**Sample and Data Acquisition:**

A total of 100 premenopausal, non-pregnant women were included in the study. Vaginal swabs were utilized for microbiome and pH analysis, while cervicovaginal lavage (CVL) samples were employed for metabolome and immunoproteome analyses. For microbiome analysis, 16s rRNA gene sequencing was performed, identifying 763 amplicon sequencing variants. Metabolic fingerprint profiling was conducted using liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry, identifying 467 unique metabolites. Immunoproteome analysis involved multiplex cytometric bead arrays targeting 68 proteins.

**Clustering:**

Clustering was initiated based on patient covariates, including disease state, genital inflammation, pH, and LD (defined as ≥ 80% relative abundance of *Lactobacillus* amplicon sequencing variants or ASVs). Principal Coordinate Analysis was employed for microbiome data due to its compositional nature, while Principal Component Analysis was utilized for metabolome and immunoproteome data.

**Microbiome and Metabolome Data Integration with mmvec:**

To investigate microbial-metabolite interactions in the cervicovaginal microenvironment, microbe-metabolite vectors (mmvec) was used, a neural network that analyzes microbiome and metabolome data for co-occurrence probabilities, where the probability of observing a metabolite given that a microbe was observed is conditional. Inspired by natural language processing, mmvec learns how microbes and metabolites co-occur across samples and conditions, predicting an entire metabolite abundance profile from a single microbe sequence through iterative training and microbe-metabolite interactions which can then be ranked and visualized via dimensionality reduction, providing valuable insights into the underlying functional relationships within the system. This can involve microbes producing specific metabolites, or metabolites influencing microbial growth or activity. It accounts for the fact that the abundances of both data types are relative, a limitation to previous correlation methods, making mmvec more accurate for complex and interdependent systems. (2)

Modeling with mmvec exhibits several limitations. Most notably, mmvec demands substantial high-quality data for reliable predictions, hindering its use with limited data sets. Its black-box nature also impedes interpretability, making precise cause-and-effect identification challenging. Additionally, its predictive power is specific to the training data, limiting its generalizability to other contexts or conditions with distinct microbial and metabolic profiles. For instance, training on gut microbiome and metabolome data from human adults may not reliably predict interactions in the gut microbiome of infants; a new model would be required for infant data. Furthermore, it assumes a compositional nature for both data types, raising accuracy concerns for certain metabolites, especially evident in the gut microbiome where dietary metabolites may be directly absorbed by the human host. This compositional aspect necessitates careful consideration in data interpretation. Finally, while mmvec performs well with simple non-linear relationships, it may struggle in predicting more complex microbe-metabolite interactions, particularly where multiple bacteria synergistically produce a metabolite through a multi-step process. In such cases, mmvec might capture individual associations but struggle to discern the nuanced interactions responsible for actual metabolite production. (2)

**Random Forest Regression and Classification:**

Next, the study used 10-fold cross validation Random Forest regression and classification to further investigate associations between microbiome, metabolome, and immunoproteome and the abundance of individual metabolites, *Lactobacillus* dominance, pH, genital inflammation, and cervical neoplasm status. The authors tried to improve predictive accuracy of their models by evaluating the integration of various combinations of the three data sets.

LD samples were defined as samples where *Lactobacillus* ASVs comprise ≥ 80% of the vaginal microbiome. Samples were grouped into LD or NLD (non-Lactobacillus dominant). For pH, samples were grouped into “low” (pH ≤ 5.0) and “high” pH groups (pH > 5.0). For genital inflammation, a score of 0-7 was assigned to subjects based on levels of 7 cytokines and chemokines (IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-8, MIP-1β, MIP-3α, RANTES, and TNFα) measured in CVL samples. Subjects were then assigned a score based on whether the level of each immune mediator was in the upper quartile and grouped into no, low, or high inflammation groups (0, 0<score<5, ≥5 respectively). To predict cervical neoplasm status, samples were grouped by control HPV-, control HPV+, LSIL, HSIL, and ICC.

### **Results**

The application of mmvec revealed lipids as a significant association with non-Lactobacillus ASVs, while *Lactobacillus* species were correlated with non-lipid metabolites, aligning with previous studies linking lipids to ICC and high inflammation, and non-lipid metabolites to LD and low inflammation. Random Forest classifications demonstrated robust predictive capabilities for metabolites, maintaining their strength even after excluding cases of ICC, emphasizing the close alignment of the metabolome, microbiome, and immunoproteome across subjects, regardless of their specific cancer diagnosis. The robust predictive power of immunoproteomic biomarkers, derived from microbiome and metabolome profiles, highlighted a strong correlation. Additionally, the metabolome and immunoproteome profiles exhibited a significant association with LD, suggesting a connection between host immunological responses and composition of the cervicovaginal microenvironment. Notably, the predictive features of LD were in concordance with mmvec results. While weak to moderate predictive accuracy was observed for pH and cervical neoplasm status, moderately high predictive strength was observed for vaginal inflammation. Integrating the data led to modest improvement of overall accuracy, with the metabolome emerging as the most influential predictor, driving classifier accuracy. This comprehensive analysis sheds light on the intricate relationships within the cervicovaginal microenvironment and emphasizes the important role of metabolomic profiles in predictive modeling.

### **Critique**

There are multiple limitations specific to mmvec within the context of this study. First, mmvec calculates co-occurrence probabilities, but doesn't directly provide statistical tests to determine the statistical significance of co-occurrence, meaning high co-occurrence probabilities don't guarantee statistically significant interactions. Further analysis using appropriate statistical tests is needed to confirm significance. Second, mmvec provides a score or ranking for the strength of each microbe-metabolite interaction based on the co-occurrence probability, but doesn't provide confidence intervals around these scores, hindering the ability to assess the precision and potential variability of the estimated strength due to sampling or other statistical uncertainties.  Interpretation of the reported interaction strength scores should be approached with caution, acknowledging their inherent imprecision and uncertainty. Like mmvec, Random Forest is a machine learning model characterized by a “black box” nature. Use of such machine learning models in multi-omics studies introduces challenges in interpreting biological implications. Caution should be exercised, and results should be validated with other approaches to ensure biological relevance. The combination of mmvec and Random Forest classification used in this study helps to remove ambiguity introduced by each model individually, providing a more comprehensive understanding of the complex interactions within this system, the cervicovaginal microbiome.

Since the metabolomics data drove the classifier accuracy but didn’t perfectly predict results, improvement on supervised classification and integrating the data types should be made. Although metabolites could be used as proxy for microbiome and immunoproteome features, shown in this study, improvements in feature extraction and normalization methods for multi-omics studies should result in higher accuracy.  Expanding the size of the training set would address various aspects of this study, particularly considering the potential for greater microbiome variance across individuals compared to metabolome variance, necessitating a larger training set for microbiome-based classification, as discussed in the paper. Enlarging the training set for all three datasets would also improve cervical neoplasm status, genital inflammation, and pH predictive accuracies. Notably, the models that had lower predictive power exhibited a common characteristic – the binned nature of the features. Improving the nature of these features could also be improved to improve predictive strength. (1)

Regarding the sample set itself, a more diverse sample set should be used as culture and background can make an impact on microbiome through genetic and biological factors, lifestyle and dietary practices, hygiene practices, and geographical and environmental factors.

### **Future Directions**

The authors propose the development of tools to utilize longitudinal data in future studies with the goal of predicting ICC diagnosis prediction and cancer risk based on multiple observations per subject of the cervicovaginal microenvironment. Additionally, they intend to develop an interactive visualization tool for exploration and interpretation of multi-omics network data, which could facilitate ease of access to high burden of disease populations. This versatile multi-omics approach extends beyond the vaginal microbiome and can be applied to other clinically relevant areas. The establishment of metabolic biomarkers and understanding links to specific clinical outcomes, like tracking changes in the metabolome during and after treatment for infections or other conditions can aid in assessing therapy efficacy and tailoring treatment plans. Furthermore, understanding how metabolites influence immune responses can lead to the development of novel therapeutic strategies targeting specific metabolic pathways within the microbiome to modulate the immune system. The potential for developing microbiome-based immunotherapies is also highlighted, suggesting that manipulating the composition or metabolic activity of the gut microbiome could offer non-invasive means to modulate immune responses and treat various diseases.

### **Conclusion**

In conclusion, this study represents a significant stride in advancing our understanding of women's health, particularly in the context of cervical cancer, by employing cutting-edge omics approaches. The integration of microbiome, metabolome, and immunoproteome data has unveiled intricate relationships within the cervicovaginal microenvironment. The application of mmvec, despite its limitations, has yielded valuable insights into microbial-metabolite interactions. The incorporation of Random Forest regression and classification further strengthened predictive models for metabolites, immunoproteomic biomarkers, and *Lactobacillus* dominance. Integrating these diverse data sets enhanced overall accuracy, with the metabolome emerging as a pivotal predictor.

This study's findings underscore the potential of multi-omics approaches in unveiling the complexity of the cervicovaginal microenvironment. The results hold promise for developing personalized treatments, identifying biomarkers for disease, and improving preventive and therapeutic interventions for cervical cancer, especially in populations facing a high burden of disease. The broader application of this multi-omics approach extends beyond the vaginal microbiome, paving the way for innovative therapeutic strategies and personalized treatments that leverage the intricate relationships between microbiota, metabolites, and the immune system.

### **References**

1. Bokulich NA, Łaniewski P, Adamov A, Chase DM, Caporaso JG, Herbst-Kralovetz MM (2022) Multi-omics data integration reveals metabolome as the top predictor of the cervicovaginal microenvironment. PLoS Comput Biol 18(2): e1009876. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009876
2. Morton, J.T., Aksenov, A.A., Nothias, L.F. et al. Learning representations of microbe–metabolite interactions. Nat Methods 16, 1306–1314 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0616-3
